---
title: 'Painting Thoughts with Melodies'
date: 2024-04-09
permalink: /musicportfolio/2024/04/blog-post-1/
layout: single
author_profile: true
tags:
  - music
---

This is one of the speeches I delivered during speech class at the university. The original date of delivery is February 20, 2024. However, this summarizes my thoughts on music as a frequent listener of classical music and who loves to play the piano. I play clarinet in classical orchestras whenever I get a chance.

Enjoy!

Sometimes, I close my eyes, pause my thinking, and find myself humming a simple melody. A second later, I feel refreshed and recharged again. It is amazing how a small melody, in other words, can capture a whole mood.

It is as if I had a conversation with myself. Why this is important? Because it is a way of self-expression. In my case, I could not figure out a way to express myself for a long time, and I would keep everything to myself. But now, I talk to my piano, every single day, and this wooden giant knows all about me. Think of a time you put on some music, and let yourself emerge into it. You may have felt the same way as I have.

So, this expressiveness to music comes from various aspects. Certain combinations of keys, chords, rhythms, dynamics, and articulations altogether bring out different emotions. 
Although it feels magical, it is more like what we do, math and science. The simplest example is how the harmonic series is used to create the 12 notes in music. 
Underlying concepts of Fibonacci numbers are everywhere in great chord progressions.  
The tonal and rhythmic structure, in other words, the arrangement of the frequency domain and time domain plays a crucial part in delivering the musical idea.

There's a famous quote, “Where words fail, music speaks”. 
In fact, think of a time when you listen to a song in another language that you don’t understand a single word, but still, you feel and get the idea of it. 
If not, think of movie soundtracks, like Inception or Interstellar. Imagine it without the soundtrack. Would you be able to understand the story? Not exactly, it connects you to the story and lets you be a part of it. 
Even when you listen to a song, maybe pop, jazz, rock, metal, or even classical, any genre of music, these melodies tell you a story and connect you to the storyteller. 
So, music is truly a universal way of understanding.
Conclusion
In conclusion, music is a way of self-expression and a means of communication. It's the best way to speak of your emotions better than any language, and it paints the perfect picture of your thoughts. So, the next time you listen, let your mind follow the patterns of musical notes and let it paint your thoughts with melodies. 
